Dawie Kriel made the offensive post relating to fireworks and the Hindu festival of Diwali earlier this year. A haggard-looking Kriel, dressed in a hoodie and brown pants, appeared before Magistrate Themba Sishi on Monday. He stated that he intended pleading guilty to the charge at a later stage. Kriel was given a warning and asked to return to court on January 17, 2017. He then rushed out of the court with his face covered. Dawie Kriel the man who posted a racist rant on Facebook lambasting Diwali and Indians leaves court. He intends pleading guilty @News24 pic.twitter.com/OvjxuQ6oJ7 Singh (@kaveels) 28 November 2016 Rant made in 'anger' In his Facebook post, Kriel spoke about his dislike of fireworks set off over the weekend-long festival of light. "Same story every year. Despite the outcry about crackers every year and in spite of the ban on the imports, Zuma still gives the Gupta's and company license to import that shit by the container load. Profit profit profit," he had posted. The post continued: "To those idol worshippers and devil disciples who buy them in the name of religion, piss-off back to your dark hole in the backwoods of India you dickhead!! I could strangle you morons with my bare hands and derive great pleasure in watching your face turn blue and your tongue pop out." He also undertook to promote what he called "Divali" with bang-free fireworks. Afterwards Kriel posted an apology for his rant made "in anger". Political parties intervene The ANC previously opened a case with police against Kriel. ANC spokesperson Mdumiseni Ntuli on Monday told media houses that party members had attended the court proceedings to ensure that the case continued smoothly. "We want to reaffirm the commitment of the ANC to fight and oppose anybody who wants to take our country back to where it was before we attained our freedom in 1994." Also in attendance was DA KwaZulu-Natal leader Zwakele Mncwango, who said the party was in court to highlight the cancer of racism countrywide. "[Kriel's] post shows there are still some South African's that are racist. We are here to fight that. We are tired of racism." DA KZN leader says there's no place for racists following the appearance or Dawie Kriel who made racist comments on Diwali @News24 pic.twitter.com/vkTUePk4yS Singh (@kaveels) 28 November 2016 News24