This film was produced by: This film was produced by: This film was produced by: This film was produced by: Street Talk is a groundbreaking television series aired weekly on community television. From grassroots to the establishment, our engaging programmes expose the lived realities and uncensored views of ordinary South Africans. Street Talk is a groundbreaking television series aired weekly on community television. From grassroots to the establishment, our engaging programmes expose the lived realities and uncensored views of ordinary South Africans. Street Talk is a groundbreaking television series aired weekly on community television. From grassroots to the establishment, our engaging programmes expose the lived realities and uncensored views of ordinary South Africans. Street Talk is a groundbreaking television series aired weekly on community television. From grassroots to the establishment, our engaging programmes expose the lived realities and uncensored views of ordinary South Africans. Street Talk was launched in 2008 and is a non-profit organisation visit us Street Talk was launched in 2008 and is a non-profit organisation visit us Street Talk was launched in 2008 and is a non-profit organisation visit us Street Talk was launched in 2008 and is a non-profit organisation visit us Street Talk was launched in 2008 and is a non-profit organisation visit us Street Talk was launched in 2008 and is a non-profit organisation visit us www.streettalktv.com www.streettalktv.com Photo: President Jacob Zuma and ANC deputy president Cyril Ramaphosa take the Oath of Office during the swearing in of MPs as South Africa's fifth Parliament convened for the first time in Cape Town on Wednesday, 21 May 2014. Picture: GCIS/SAPA Photo: President Jacob Zuma and ANC deputy president Cyril Ramaphosa take the Oath of Office during the swearing in of MPs as South Africa's fifth Parliament convened for the first time in Cape Town on Wednesday, 21 May 2014. Picture: GCIS/SAPA Photo: President Jacob Zuma and ANC deputy president Cyril Ramaphosa take the Oath of Office during the swearing in of MPs as South Africa's fifth Parliament convened for the first time in Cape Town on Wednesday, 21 May 2014. Picture: GCIS/SAPA Photo: President Jacob Zuma and ANC deputy president Cyril Ramaphosa take the Oath of Office during the swearing in of MPs as South Africa's fifth Parliament convened for the first time in Cape Town on Wednesday, 21 May 2014. Picture: GCIS/SAPA Street Talk is a groundbreaking television series aired weekly on community television. From grassroots to the establishment, our engaging programmes expose the lived realities and uncensored views of ordinary South Africans. Street Talk was launched in 2008 and is a non-profit organisation - visit us www.streettalktv.com www.streettalktv.com