 All individuals who were invited and withdrew their participation have chosen to put the interests of the country first and, in the process, demonstrated their dignity and self-worth, EFF spokesperson Mbuyiseni Ndlozi said. All individuals who were invited and withdrew their participation have chosen to put the interests of the country first and, in the process, demonstrated their dignity and self-worth, EFF spokesperson Mbuyiseni Ndlozi said. All individuals who were invited and withdrew their participation have chosen to put the interests of the country first and, in the process, demonstrated their dignity and self-worth, EFF spokesperson Mbuyiseni Ndlozi said. This follows ANN7 s editor-in-chief Moegsien Williams announcement that a new date would be announced in due course for the SATY Awards. This follows ANN7 s editor-in-chief Moegsien Williams announcement that a new date would be announced in due course for the SATY Awards. This follows ANN7 s editor-in-chief Moegsien Williams announcement that a new date would be announced in due course for the SATY Awards. The postponement is due to unforeseen regulatory circumstances that have materially impacted on logistics for the event. Regretfully this has left us with no choice but to seek a new date in the near future. We look forward to confirming a rescheduled date, Williams said in a statement posted on the channel s website. The postponement is due to unforeseen regulatory circumstances that have materially impacted on logistics for the event. Regretfully this has left us with no choice but to seek a new date in the near future. We look forward to confirming a rescheduled date, Williams said in a statement posted on the channel s website. The postponement is due to unforeseen regulatory circumstances that have materially impacted on logistics for the event. Regretfully this has left us with no choice but to seek a new date in the near future. We look forward to confirming a rescheduled date, Williams said in a statement posted on the channel s website. Ndlozi called for more people to boycott all companies associated with the controversial Gupta family including their news channel and newspaper. Ndlozi called for more people to boycott all companies associated with the controversial Gupta family including their news channel and newspaper. Ndlozi called for more people to boycott all companies associated with the controversial Gupta family including their news channel and newspaper. We must all stop going to the Gupta-owned ANN7 TV programmes and taking interviews from The New Age. We must all stop going to the Gupta-owned ANN7 TV programmes and taking interviews from The New Age. We must all stop going to the Gupta-owned ANN7 TV programmes and taking interviews from The New Age. This family has abused the generosity of the South African spirit, humiliated our hospitality simply because they have bought politicians of the ANC and are in business with [President] Jacob Zuma. This family has abused the generosity of the South African spirit, humiliated our hospitality simply because they have bought politicians of the ANC and are in business with [President] Jacob Zuma. This family has abused the generosity of the South African spirit, humiliated our hospitality simply because they have bought politicians of the ANC and are in business with [President] Jacob Zuma. Ndlozi said the family allegedly corrupted the only concrete democratic gain that the struggle for liberation has placed in the hands of black people, which is the state. Moreover, they have arrogated themselves the powers to appoint Cabinet ministers and board members of parastatals like Eskom . Ndlozi said the family allegedly corrupted the only concrete democratic gain that the struggle for liberation has placed in the hands of black people, which is the state. Moreover, they have arrogated themselves the powers to appoint Cabinet ministers and board members of parastatals like Eskom . Ndlozi said the family allegedly corrupted the only concrete democratic gain that the struggle for liberation has placed in the hands of black people, which is the state. Moreover, they have arrogated themselves the powers to appoint Cabinet ministers and board members of parastatals like Eskom . He was referring the explosive findings that emerged in the Public Protector s He was referring the explosive findings that emerged in the Public Protector s He was referring the explosive findings that emerged in the Public Protector s He was referring the explosive findings that emerged in the Public Protector s He was referring the explosive findings that emerged in the Public Protector s State of Capture State of Capture State of Capture State of Capture State of Capture report which investigated whether the family benefitted from its relationship with the president and his family. report which investigated whether the family benefitted from its relationship with the president and his family. report which investigated whether the family benefitted from its relationship with the president and his family. report which investigated whether the family benefitted from its relationship with the president and his family. report which investigated whether the family benefitted from its relationship with the president and his family. DM DM DM DM DM Source: News24 Source: News24 Source: News24