An EFF supporter stands on a couch thrown into the streets as the party moved into the streets while gathering in Tshwane, demanding President Jacob Zuma resign and for higher education costs to fall. (Greg Nicolson) An EFF supporter stands on a couch thrown into the streets as the party moved into the streets while gathering in Tshwane, demanding President Jacob Zuma resign and for higher education costs to fall. (Greg Nicolson) Someone marching with the EFF tips a bin out as groups marched through Tshwane on Wednesday. Marchers upended bins, placed stones in the road, forced motorists to turn around and stores to close in their attempt to shut the city down. (Greg Nicolson) Someone marching with the EFF tips a bin out as groups marched through Tshwane on Wednesday. Marchers upended bins, placed stones in the road, forced motorists to turn around and stores to close in their attempt to shut the city down. (Greg Nicolson) EFF supporters march through Tshwane streets with signs calling for Zuma to go. (Greg Nicolson) EFF supporters march through Tshwane streets with signs calling for Zuma to go. (Greg Nicolson) Marchers on Wednesday carry mattresses they set alight. Some people marching with the EFF wanted to start fires or loot stores, while others stopped them, telling them to be peaceful. (Greg Nicolson) Marchers on Wednesday carry mattresses they set alight. Some people marching with the EFF wanted to start fires or loot stores, while others stopped them, telling them to be peaceful. (Greg Nicolson) A mother and daughter, one an EFF supporter, the other backing the DA, pose near Tshwane s Church Square, which was the centre point for the EFF on Wednesday. (Greg Nicolson) A mother and daughter, one an EFF supporter, the other backing the DA, pose near Tshwane s Church Square, which was the centre point for the EFF on Wednesday. (Greg Nicolson) An EFF supporter sings next to police on Wednesday. (Greg Nicolson) An EFF supporter sings next to police on Wednesday. (Greg Nicolson) Police were far outnumbered and outmanoeuvred by EFF supporters at certain points on Wednesday. At one point, police tried to block supporters from passing intersections near Church Square. EFF supporters, however, were able to march around the block so they were facing the cops from both sides, forcing the police to withdraw their containment attempt. (Greg Nicolson) Police were far outnumbered and outmanoeuvred by EFF supporters at certain points on Wednesday. At one point, police tried to block supporters from passing intersections near Church Square. EFF supporters, however, were able to march around the block so they were facing the cops from both sides, forcing the police to withdraw their containment attempt. (Greg Nicolson) A heavy police contingent tried earlier on to contain the EFF supporters, who later faced off with the SAPS at the Union Buildings. (Greg Nicolson) A heavy police contingent tried earlier on to contain the EFF supporters, who later faced off with the SAPS at the Union Buildings. (Greg Nicolson) An EFF supporter meets children yelling Zuma must fall . (Greg Nicolson) An EFF supporter meets children yelling Zuma must fall . (Greg Nicolson) Save South Africa was one of the groups meeting in Tshwane on Wednesday. Attendees walk past the EFF marchers after their meeting. (Greg Nicolson) Save South Africa was one of the groups meeting in Tshwane on Wednesday. Attendees walk past the EFF marchers after their meeting. (Greg Nicolson) An EFF supporter gazes through binoculars. You must be prepared for the revolution, he said. (Greg Nicolson) An EFF supporter gazes through binoculars. You must be prepared for the revolution, he said. (Greg Nicolson) A clown near Church Square carries a placard: JZ is no clown. Clowns are good people. (Greg Nicolson) DM A clown near Church Square carries a placard: JZ is no clown. Clowns are good people. (Greg Nicolson) DM DM DM Main photo: EFF supporters block a road. The EFF successfully managed to shut down Tshwane s CBD as a number of groups set off in different directions to close the roads. The police did not have the manpower to cover the different groups and most often, even as some attempted to loot stores or set fires, there were no police in site. (Greg Nicolson) Main photo: EFF supporters block a road. The EFF successfully managed to shut down Tshwane s CBD as a number of groups set off in different directions to close the roads. The police did not have the manpower to cover the different groups and most often, even as some attempted to loot stores or set fires, there were no police in site. (Greg Nicolson)