Thapelo Kekana, 37, Mpumalanga Thapelo Kekana, 37, Mpumalanga This is a national call. I m here in response to that national call. A call whereby we say the issue of electing a president from a party must stop. Zuma only wants to empower his friends and family. We want to demonstrate that during our time there was a certain Zuma who looted state resources and abused state institutions for the good of the Zuma and Guptas names. We are saying we ve had enough of one man fighting his battles using state resources. It s important to highlight that our gathering here today is also to call for free education. The reason I think this march could bear fruit is because we have staged the march in the capital city. We have no starting or finishing point. We are marching to ensure that every business shuts down. We are raising awareness. we want the international community to know we are forcing the dishonest, unethical president to resign. This is a national call. I m here in response to that national call. A call whereby we say the issue of electing a president from a party must stop. Zuma only wants to empower his friends and family. We want to demonstrate that during our time there was a certain Zuma who looted state resources and abused state institutions for the good of the Zuma and Guptas names. We are saying we ve had enough of one man fighting his battles using state resources. It s important to highlight that our gathering here today is also to call for free education. The reason I think this march could bear fruit is because we have staged the march in the capital city. We have no starting or finishing point. We are marching to ensure that every business shuts down. We are raising awareness. we want the international community to know we are forcing the dishonest, unethical president to resign. Kekana is Eff Deputy Chairperson in the Nkangala region in Mpumalanga. Kekana is Eff Deputy Chairperson in the Nkangala region in Mpumalanga. Francina Maapula, 46, Pretoria Francina Maapula, 46, Pretoria I m obviously here to add my voice. Our rights as a nation are being stamped on by the very people we expect to protect us. I cannot afford to take my kids to school as we speak because South Africa s resources are being deliberately and greedily misused by the government. I m pleading with Zuma to please realise some conscience. He can t lead the South African Government any more and it s clear to everyone. Our kids must study free of charge. Why the sudden change, because they were promised free education? I don t ever want to see the ANC. On that account I also say, hands off Pravin Gordhan. Their troubles are eating them up and now they want to oust Minister Gordhan. My greatest wish is for Zuma to have resigned by the time we leave this city today. He doesn t deserve it all, he never did. I m obviously here to add my voice. Our rights as a nation are being stamped on by the very people we expect to protect us. I cannot afford to take my kids to school as we speak because South Africa s resources are being deliberately and greedily misused by the government. I m pleading with Zuma to please realise some conscience. He can t lead the South African Government any more and it s clear to everyone. Our kids must study free of charge. Why the sudden change, because they were promised free education? I don t ever want to see the ANC. On that account I also say, hands off Pravin Gordhan. Their troubles are eating them up and now they want to oust Minister Gordhan. My greatest wish is for Zuma to have resigned by the time we leave this city today. He doesn t deserve it all, he never did. Fabian Weltu, 20, Johannesburg Fabian Weltu, 20, Johannesburg For me it s very important that fees fall. We are here today, the four of us, as privileged kids but we cannot continue to watch our colleagues suffer alone. I believe that even though free education cannot readily be available to everyone, the poor must be taken care of. We need education to divert our country from all the attention it focuses on the past. I m here to send a message that corruption and state capture can no longer be tolerated. Our government needs to get it right. We can t keep returning to these streets to show our dissatisfaction. The country needs to move forward. South Africans need to move forward. I believe that this march will yield positive results because it s being held in the centre of power and it s huge. That s what we need to draw attention to. For me it s very important that fees fall. We are here today, the four of us, as privileged kids but we cannot continue to watch our colleagues suffer alone. I believe that even though free education cannot readily be available to everyone, the poor must be taken care of. We need education to divert our country from all the attention it focuses on the past. I m here to send a message that corruption and state capture can no longer be tolerated. Our government needs to get it right. We can t keep returning to these streets to show our dissatisfaction. The country needs to move forward. South Africans need to move forward. I believe that this march will yield positive results because it s being held in the centre of power and it s huge. That s what we need to draw attention to. Kenny Motsamai, 53, Johannesburg Kenny Motsamai, 53, Johannesburg I m here to support the EFF after no one else wants to expose all the corruption in our country. We are imprisoned by our very government. They are oppressing us. Hats off to Zuma for destroying the ANC. The man has literally destroyed the ANC, and that will be more evident in 2019. He has allowed it to be used by other people who have no interest in South Africa whatsoever. He is president only by name his deeds are not that of a sitting president. The ANC must solve the issue of funding in universities in the country. No more police brutality in our campuses. The police are sent to our campuses to protect white students while shooting black students. The police are a third monopoly force. Can Zuma please leave. I m here to support the EFF after no one else wants to expose all the corruption in our country. We are imprisoned by our very government. They are oppressing us. Hats off to Zuma for destroying the ANC. The man has literally destroyed the ANC, and that will be more evident in 2019. He has allowed it to be used by other people who have no interest in South Africa whatsoever. He is president only by name his deeds are not that of a sitting president. The ANC must solve the issue of funding in universities in the country. No more police brutality in our campuses. The police are sent to our campuses to protect white students while shooting black students. The police are a third monopoly force. Can Zuma please leave. Nothando Ntsebenza, 25, East Rand Nothando Ntsebenza, 25, East Rand I m here to support the fees must fall call. I m also here to call upon NSFAS to stop inviting high school leavers to apply for funding because when we attempt to do so they tell us the forms are finished. How are they expecting to drive a successful funding campaign when they are ill-prepared for offering that funding? I matriculated with distinctions but am still sitting at home. Nyaope is killing our brothers in the township while our leaders... Zuma must be replaced immediately, but not with Cyril Ramaphosa because he s the man that is responsible for the deaths of our family members in Marikana. Enough with poverty. Zuma is the reason this country is on its knees today. I m here to support the fees must fall call. I m also here to call upon NSFAS to stop inviting high school leavers to apply for funding because when we attempt to do so they tell us the forms are finished. How are they expecting to drive a successful funding campaign when they are ill-prepared for offering that funding? I matriculated with distinctions but am still sitting at home. Nyaope is killing our brothers in the township while our leaders... Zuma must be replaced immediately, but not with Cyril Ramaphosa because he s the man that is responsible for the deaths of our family members in Marikana. Enough with poverty. Zuma is the reason this country is on its knees today. Mphuthumi Gqibela, 36, Westonaria Mphuthumi Gqibela, 36, Westonaria I ve come to stand up for my country. I realise we can t take the oppression and corruption any more. I actually am praying for Zuma to fall. We have seen it all. All we want now is for him to resign, and only then will we realise peace in our country. I m sick and tired of the corruption perpetrated by Zuma, his friends in and outside the ANC. We can no longer stand by and expect other right-thinking South Africans to act on our part. I am 100% sure this march will draw a positive response from our sleeping government because we are a united front here today. Meanwhile Zuma must go, we ve had enough of him. If he has some conscience, he will resign. I m here to alert all South Africans to the thuggery in leadership. I ve come to stand up for my country. I realise we can t take the oppression and corruption any more. I actually am praying for Zuma to fall. We have seen it all. All we want now is for him to resign, and only then will we realise peace in our country. I m sick and tired of the corruption perpetrated by Zuma, his friends in and outside the ANC. We can no longer stand by and expect other right-thinking South Africans to act on our part. I am 100% sure this march will draw a positive response from our sleeping government because we are a united front here today. Meanwhile Zuma must go, we ve had enough of him. If he has some conscience, he will resign. I m here to alert all South Africans to the thuggery in leadership. Thabitha Mashegoana, 43, Vaal Thabitha Mashegoana, 43, Vaal First and foremost I d call for Zuma s immediate resignation because he has the interests of his family and friends at heart, and not the country s that he supposedly leads. He doesn t care for South Africans. We have had enough. The reason we are suffering is because of all the looting that takes place in government yet we are short of clinics in the Vaal. We use mobile clinics all the time and you can imagine if for some reason they fail to turn up as has been the case previously. Our kids are smoking nyaope. Pre-school owners need land to build facilities but no one pays attention because, as we understand it, it s okay that our kids cannot go to school, but it hurts to see them dependant on drugs. We are united here today there is no DA, UDM, or EFF and we are hoping our collective effort can help us realise change. First and foremost I d call for Zuma s immediate resignation because he has the interests of his family and friends at heart, and not the country s that he supposedly leads. He doesn t care for South Africans. We have had enough. The reason we are suffering is because of all the looting that takes place in government yet we are short of clinics in the Vaal. We use mobile clinics all the time and you can imagine if for some reason they fail to turn up as has been the case previously. Our kids are smoking nyaope. Pre-school owners need land to build facilities but no one pays attention because, as we understand it, it s okay that our kids cannot go to school, but it hurts to see them dependant on drugs. We are united here today there is no DA, UDM, or EFF and we are hoping our collective effort can help us realise change. Itumeleng Komanyane, 35, Johannesburg Itumeleng Komanyane, 35, Johannesburg We are here to support South Africa s call to end corruption. We felt it s important to encourage collective action regarding the scourge of corruption. And remember state capture is a huge part of that. We are part of civil society and will always support every effort that seeks to protect the country s democracy, having realised that we are the guardians of our own democracy. Once you start talking about accountability and responsibility, well, that requires a reaction from all of us. We are also opposed to increasing (amounts of) gender violence. We stand for all that preserves human rights and democracy. DM We are here to support South Africa s call to end corruption. We felt it s important to encourage collective action regarding the scourge of corruption. And remember state capture is a huge part of that. We are part of civil society and will always support every effort that seeks to protect the country s democracy, having realised that we are the guardians of our own democracy. Once you start talking about accountability and responsibility, well, that requires a reaction from all of us. We are also opposed to increasing (amounts of) gender violence. We stand for all that preserves human rights and democracy. DM DM Photo: Smoke from burning rubbish rises in the air as EFF supporters shut down the Tshwane CBD. (Shaun Swingler/Daily Maverick Chronicle) Photo: Smoke from burning rubbish rises in the air as EFF supporters shut down the Tshwane CBD. (Shaun Swingler/Daily Maverick Chronicle)