Should I be bullish on South Africa? Should I be bullish on South Africa? I m fucking serious I m fucking serious I was actually I was actually asked asked this question shortly after last Thursday s pell-mell this question shortly after last Thursday s pell-mell Day of Legal Lunacy Day of Legal Lunacy , when a Pretoria High Court judge ordered the release of Thuli Madonsela s State of Capture report, which serves as the sequel to her oft-quoted Nkandla-bashing , when a Pretoria High Court judge ordered the release of Thuli Madonsela s State of Capture report, which serves as the sequel to her oft-quoted Nkandla-bashing Secure in Comfort Secure in Comfort opus. opus. Considered as a piece, Thuli s tomes represent the greatest literary achievement in South African history Considered as a piece, Thuli s tomes represent the greatest literary achievement in South African history sadly, not because they re in any way readable or well written. (The latest in particular seems slapdash and error-ridden.) But no one reads Tolstoy for his sentences, and Thuli s reports are classics largely because they portray the life and times of a character so charming, greedy, cunning, hubristic and slime-drenched that he swiftly joins the pantheon of the gloriously flawed: Lear sadly, not because they re in any way readable or well written. (The latest in particular seems slapdash and error-ridden.) But no one reads Tolstoy for his sentences, and Thuli s reports are classics largely because they portray the life and times of a character so charming, greedy, cunning, hubristic and slime-drenched that he swiftly joins the pantheon of the gloriously flawed: Lear , Okonkwo, Lurie, and Skywalker (Anakin, of course, not Luke). , Okonkwo, Lurie, and Skywalker (Anakin, of course, not Luke). , Okonkwo, Lurie, and Skywalker (Anakin, of course, not Luke). So I found it a little strange that, following all the Thuli-mania and Save SA latte-fuelled mini-marching, sentient South Africans still believed that Jacob Zuma So I found it a little strange that, following all the Thuli-mania and Save SA latte-fuelled mini-marching, sentient South Africans still believed that Jacob Zuma the very character so vividly brought to life in Madonsela s masterpieces the very character so vividly brought to life in Madonsela s masterpieces was somehow going to roll over and make like a dead puppy. was somehow going to roll over and make like a dead puppy. Have we learnt nothing? The man has whacked people considered to be far cleverer than he, and is so close to securing a trillion-rand retirement fund that he can actually smell the antiseptic, kiln-baked air of the United Arab Emirates. Have we learnt nothing? The man has whacked people considered to be far cleverer than he, and is so close to securing a trillion-rand retirement fund that he can actually smell the antiseptic, kiln-baked air of the United Arab Emirates. Nah, Jacob Zuma is just getting started. Nah, Jacob Zuma is just getting started. Which is why the knives have been drawn and sharpened for his enemies within the National Executive Committee, most notably ANC Secretary-General Gwede Mantashe, and Treasurer Zweli Mkhize, who now appear to be on the Hawks hook for not reporting statements made to them by deputy finance minister Mcebisi Jonas. It is alleged that Jonas was offered a fantastic R600-million signing bonus were he to step into the finance minister s position; all of this happened while he was paying an impromptu visit to the Guptas Saxonwold compound. (Future literary theorists will insist that the manse itself is a character in Madonsela s latest publication Which is why the knives have been drawn and sharpened for his enemies within the National Executive Committee, most notably ANC Secretary-General Gwede Mantashe, and Treasurer Zweli Mkhize, who now appear to be on the Hawks hook for not reporting statements made to them by deputy finance minister Mcebisi Jonas. It is alleged that Jonas was offered a fantastic R600-million signing bonus were he to step into the finance minister s position; all of this happened while he was paying an impromptu visit to the Guptas Saxonwold compound. (Future literary theorists will insist that the manse itself is a character in Madonsela s latest publication let s just say that for Thuli, sprawling luxury residences have become a trope.) let s just say that for Thuli, sprawling luxury residences have become a trope.) It s also why the now publicly disgraced Brian Molefe, CEO of Eskom, and others within his organisation, have been damning Madonsela s report as an attempt to destroy the power utility, while insisting that its author denied the boss the right to an interview, to say nothing of the fact that it concentrates almost exclusively on the Glencore/Gupta/Eskom nexus, with nary a word for other, less Saxonwold-centric state capture shenanigans. (I urge you to It s also why the now publicly disgraced Brian Molefe, CEO of Eskom, and others within his organisation, have been damning Madonsela s report as an attempt to destroy the power utility, while insisting that its author denied the boss the right to an interview, to say nothing of the fact that it concentrates almost exclusively on the Glencore/Gupta/Eskom nexus, with nary a word for other, less Saxonwold-centric state capture shenanigans. (I urge you to read this analysis read this analysis read this analysis by future president of the republic, Khaya Sithole, which offers a plausible set of explanations for Molefe s utter brain melt regarding the sale of Optimum Coal to the Gupta s Tageta outfit.) by future president of the republic, Khaya Sithole, which offers a plausible set of explanations for Molefe s utter brain melt regarding the sale of Optimum Coal to the Gupta s Tageta outfit.) It s It s also also why Zuma danced on stage during a Saturday rally in Dumbe, KwaZulu-Natal, warning his enemies that why Zuma danced on stage during a Saturday rally in Dumbe, KwaZulu-Natal, warning his enemies that he s already spent his share of time in jail he s already spent his share of time in jail , and that he was not afraid , and that he was not afraid indeed, he indeed, he welcomed welcomed the promise of rent-free, state-funded accommodation. the promise of rent-free, state-funded accommodation. We are not going to be intimidated, he cried, dabbing. We are not going to be intimidated, he cried, dabbing. And it s why Zuma and his gang of securocrats are, according to the And it s why Zuma and his gang of securocrats are, according to the City Press, City Press, once again hammering at the doors of Pravin Gordhan s office once again hammering at the doors of Pravin Gordhan s office this time with a relentlessness that would be terrifying if it weren t so inept. this time with a relentlessness that would be terrifying if it weren t so inept. *** *** So how is this all flushing out? So how is this all flushing out? A small sample of the players: ANC Youth League president, Collen Maine (the fake youth), along with A small sample of the players: ANC Youth League president, Collen Maine (the fake youth), along with Deputy Minister of Defence and Military Veterans, and ANC MK Deputy Minister of Defence and Military Veterans, and ANC MK Deputy Minister of Defence and Military Veterans, and ANC MK Military Veterans Association Military Veterans Association Military Veterans Association Military Veterans Association Military Veterans Association Military Veterans Association Kebby Maphatsoe (the fake soldier), and ANC Women s League president, Bathabile Dlamini (the fake minister), are lined up against, among others, Kebby Maphatsoe (the fake soldier), and ANC Women s League president, Bathabile Dlamini (the fake minister), are lined up against, among others, ANC chief whip and ANC chief whip and ANC chief whip and ANC chief whip and former national spokesperson Jackson Mthembu, former former national spokesperson Jackson Mthembu, former ANC chief whip Mathole Motshekga, a bunch of real stalwarts, and everyone who thinks Cyril Ramaphosa would make a fine president. (Call them the fake saviours.) ANC chief whip Mathole Motshekga, a bunch of real stalwarts, and everyone who thinks Cyril Ramaphosa would make a fine president. (Call them the fake saviours.) ANC chief whip Mathole Motshekga, a bunch of real stalwarts, and everyone who thinks Cyril Ramaphosa would make a fine president. (Call them the fake saviours.) ANC chief whip Mathole Motshekga, a bunch of real stalwarts, and everyone who thinks Cyril Ramaphosa would make a fine president. (Call them the fake saviours.) The latter bunch are asking for a consultative conference to determine the future of the ANC. The latter bunch are asking for a consultative conference to determine the future of the ANC. The latter bunch are asking for a consultative conference to determine the future of the ANC. The former bunch are not. The former bunch are not. The former bunch are not. Indeed, Zuma s camp is probably heartened by the fact that, as with all literature, State of Capture is open to any number of interpretations: some of its more baroque flourishes seem a little, well, Indeed, Zuma s camp is probably heartened by the fact that, as with all literature, State of Capture is open to any number of interpretations: some of its more baroque flourishes seem a little, well, too too baroque. So here s what ends up happening: the Hawks insist that they have desperately been trying to contact former minister/current whistle-blower Vytjie Mentor, in order to hear her version of the now ubiquitous The Guptas offered me a job! storyline. But in the age of blanket surveillance, satellite cellphone tracking, sniffer dogs, social media, and 24-hours news coverage, they ve been unable to track her down. baroque. So here s what ends up happening: the Hawks insist that they have desperately been trying to contact former minister/current whistle-blower Vytjie Mentor, in order to hear her version of the now ubiquitous The Guptas offered me a job! storyline. But in the age of blanket surveillance, satellite cellphone tracking, sniffer dogs, social media, and 24-hours news coverage, they ve been unable to track her down. Mentor, the wily genius, has apparently been hiding in plain sight. They are lying, she told the Mentor, the wily genius, has apparently been hiding in plain sight. They are lying, she told the Sunday Times Sunday Times . They know where I live . They know where I live their advocate was here to take a statement, after all their advocate was here to take a statement, after all and the very phone number on which you just reached me is on the statement. and the very phone number on which you just reached me is on the statement. It does seem like we re dealing with morons here. The sort of morons who seem uninterested in the fact that, as the Guptas ex-driver related to reporters at the It does seem like we re dealing with morons here. The sort of morons who seem uninterested in the fact that, as the Guptas ex-driver related to reporters at the Sunday Times Sunday Times , Brian Molefe visited the compound prior to his appointment as CEO at Transnet. They are likewise unfazed by , Brian Molefe visited the compound prior to his appointment as CEO at Transnet. They are likewise unfazed by Jimmy Manyi s visit Jimmy Manyi s visit in early 2011 (shortly before he became CEO of Government Communications and Information Systems.) And they couldn t care less that Des van Rooyen basically lived there before he was anointed as finance minister in Nhlanhla Nene s stead, back during those terrible few days last December. in early 2011 (shortly before he became CEO of Government Communications and Information Systems.) And they couldn t care less that Des van Rooyen basically lived there before he was anointed as finance minister in Nhlanhla Nene s stead, back during those terrible few days last December. (They don t care about these slam dunks by amaBhungane either: (They don t care about these slam dunks by amaBhungane either: R587m in six hours how Eskom paid for Gupta mine R587m in six hours how Eskom paid for Gupta mine , and State Capture The Guptas and the R250-million kickback laundry unpacked in full, published recently in Daily Maverick. Nothing to see here, move along. , and State Capture The Guptas and the R250-million kickback laundry unpacked in full, published recently in Daily Maverick. Nothing to see here, move along. ED) ED) The Hawks, however, aren t bad at their job in the same way that you re bad at your job: their fuck-ups sure look like part of the plan. That plan, such as it is, constitutes sowing as much high-grade chaos as possible, so that eventually their marks either a) crack and confess to something, The Hawks, however, aren t bad at their job in the same way that you re bad at your job: their fuck-ups sure look like part of the plan. That plan, such as it is, constitutes sowing as much high-grade chaos as possible, so that eventually their marks either a) crack and confess to something, any any thing, b) flee to the private sector, c) check into an insane asylum, or d) all of the above. The country s highest-profile crime fighters have been reduced a squad of shakedown artists thing, b) flee to the private sector, c) check into an insane asylum, or d) all of the above. The country s highest-profile crime fighters have been reduced a squad of shakedown artists a ganglet of minor thugs with the power to harass the country into submission. a ganglet of minor thugs with the power to harass the country into submission. Which, I suppose, goes some ways in explaining the rationale behind the latest Gordhan debacle. Which, I suppose, goes some ways in explaining the rationale behind the latest Gordhan debacle. *** *** A reasonable thing to ask when you re threatened with arrest is A reasonable thing to ask when you re threatened with arrest is what law did I break? what law did I break? Under normal circumstances, a charge will be proffered by the arresting officers, and said charge will initiate a legal process. But if the folks arresting you can t or won t tell you why they re repeatedly Tazing your ass, you re probably in North Korea, Zimbabwe, or driving while black in the United States of America. Under normal circumstances, a charge will be proffered by the arresting officers, and said charge will initiate a legal process. But if the folks arresting you can t or won t tell you why they re repeatedly Tazing your ass, you re probably in North Korea, Zimbabwe, or driving while black in the United States of America. Indeed, back in May, when the nonsense regarding Gordhan first broke, it was a national sport trying to figure out which law the minister was supposed to have defiled. A list of 27 questions was sent to him via his legal representatives, asking him to explain certain activities related to his time as head of the South African Revenue Service (SARS). In particular, the questions pointed to his having overseen the set-up of a rogue intelligence unit, another of our many shakedown outfits. Indeed, back in May, when the nonsense regarding Gordhan first broke, it was a national sport trying to figure out which law the minister was supposed to have defiled. A list of 27 questions was sent to him via his legal representatives, asking him to explain certain activities related to his time as head of the South African Revenue Service (SARS). In particular, the questions pointed to his having overseen the set-up of a rogue intelligence unit, another of our many shakedown outfits. The minister s baffled reply can basically be whittled down to: WTF? The minister s baffled reply can basically be whittled down to: WTF? But see, there is a wrinkle to this story. As But see, there is a wrinkle to this story. As Ranjeni Munusamy Ranjeni Munusamy noted in these pages, back in 2001 a meeting between former and current officials was held in the Intelligence Academy in Mafikeng. The whole thing was designed as a training course for the intelligence heads, all of whom were tripping over each other in their attempts to achieve nothing with the greatest amount of inefficiency. noted in these pages, back in 2001 a meeting between former and current officials was held in the Intelligence Academy in Mafikeng. The whole thing was designed as a training course for the intelligence heads, all of whom were tripping over each other in their attempts to achieve nothing with the greatest amount of inefficiency. And who addressed this meeting but none other than deputy president Jacob Zuma, an ex-intelligence hack himself from his MK days. And who addressed this meeting but none other than deputy president Jacob Zuma, an ex-intelligence hack himself from his MK days. He s He s the one who spoke to all the intelligence heads; the one who spoke to all the intelligence heads; he s he s the one who suggested streamlining the intelligence operations, and that there should be better co-operation between the various intel agencies. the one who suggested streamlining the intelligence operations, and that there should be better co-operation between the various intel agencies. Now, former SARS deputy commissioner Ivan Pillay and other representatives Now, former SARS deputy commissioner Ivan Pillay and other representatives from institution from institution from institution happened to be at that meeting. And this address, they claim, was where the idea for SARS developing its own sleuthing unit came from. happened to be at that meeting. And this address, they claim, was where the idea for SARS developing its own sleuthing unit came from. In other words, no one less than Jacob Zuma was the catalyst behind the weaponising of SARS. In other words, no one less than Jacob Zuma was the catalyst behind the weaponising of SARS. Seeing as no one has accused Gordhan of doing any actual spy-vs-spy shit, his crime, it seems, is having established a unit that Jacob Zuma encouraged him to establish in the first place. Seeing as no one has accused Gordhan of doing any actual spy-vs-spy shit, his crime, it seems, is having established a unit that Jacob Zuma encouraged him to establish in the first place. Did Gordhan break the National Strategic Intelligence Act? Now that s a super serious infraction. But that s not what he s been charged with, and there seems no possible way that a case of that nature could stick. Did Gordhan break the National Strategic Intelligence Act? Now that s a super serious infraction. But that s not what he s been charged with, and there seems no possible way that a case of that nature could stick. Thankfully, several weeks ago Shaun Abrahams performed a workable impression of Clint Eastwood, and growled that, the days of disrespecting the NPA are over . It s still a little difficult, however, to assess how this newfound respect has translated into action. I m thinking aloud here, but I don t think anyone has had their ass kicked as hard and as thoroughly as Abrahams has over the past several weeks. In early October, he called a press conference to announce that he was charging Gordhan and two former colleagues with fraud and theft. Twenty days later, he called a press conference to announce that he was dropping the charges. Anyone with a shred of humility would have committed harakiri on live television. Thankfully, several weeks ago Shaun Abrahams performed a workable impression of Clint Eastwood, and growled that, the days of disrespecting the NPA are over . It s still a little difficult, however, to assess how this newfound respect has translated into action. I m thinking aloud here, but I don t think anyone has had their ass kicked as hard and as thoroughly as Abrahams has over the past several weeks. In early October, he called a press conference to announce that he was charging Gordhan and two former colleagues with fraud and theft. Twenty days later, he called a press conference to announce that he was dropping the charges. Anyone with a shred of humility would have committed harakiri on live television. Not Shaun Abrahams. Not Shaun Abrahams. Now, he s back for another round of a whack-a-mole, a game at which he sucks profoundly. What s more, as with everything in this administration, once you start futzing with the plumbing, everyone tends to get washed away with the sewerage. Now, he s back for another round of a whack-a-mole, a game at which he sucks profoundly. What s more, as with everything in this administration, once you start futzing with the plumbing, everyone tends to get washed away with the sewerage. *** *** Which is another way of saying that this is a sad story. Which is another way of saying that this is a sad story. There are many, many gaps in the Public Protector s report There are many, many gaps in the Public Protector s report it does nothing to make the true scope of the rot any clearer. (What s more, its cover image appears to have been lifted from a piece of it does nothing to make the true scope of the rot any clearer. (What s more, its cover image appears to have been lifted from a piece of shitty shitty Being John Malkovich Being John Malkovich fan art fan art . Which is appropriate, I suppose, if the intent was to be insanely, deeply meta.) The rot goes so, so deep . Which is appropriate, I suppose, if the intent was to be insanely, deeply meta.) The rot goes so, so deep deeper, it appears, than any of us can fully appreciate. deeper, it appears, than any of us can fully appreciate. One thing we should probably appreciate is that as an average, or even as a below average South African, we are without champions. The businesses and banks coming out in support of the current finance minister are not your friends: they peddle influence in their own dangerous ways. They lobby, cajole, bully, buy One thing we should probably appreciate is that as an average, or even as a below average South African, we are without champions. The businesses and banks coming out in support of the current finance minister are not your friends: they peddle influence in their own dangerous ways. They lobby, cajole, bully, buy they just do so with old school aplomb, rather than with new school crassness. The cadres lining up against Zuma, silent for so long, are bleating because of political expediency: they re hedging, and who can blame them? they just do so with old school aplomb, rather than with new school crassness. The cadres lining up against Zuma, silent for so long, are bleating because of political expediency: they re hedging, and who can blame them? But one thing Madonsela s report has certainly done is nudged her finest literary creation But one thing Madonsela s report has certainly done is nudged her finest literary creation President Jacob Zuma President Jacob Zuma further towards a literary finale. He is locked in an existential battle to avoid both prison and penury, and she has helped us all get closer to the final, bloody act. further towards a literary finale. He is locked in an existential battle to avoid both prison and penury, and she has helped us all get closer to the final, bloody act. As far as endings go, don t count Jacob Zuma out. He will chase Gordhan into another dimension if he has to, consequences be damned. (That downgrade? Brace yourself.) He will use every dilatory tactic known to the legal profession in order to stall the formation of the judicial committee of enquiry that was mandated in the State of Capture report. He will swing wildly and often, and a cardboard stage sword will vanquish his opposition with a billion paper-cuts As far as endings go, don t count Jacob Zuma out. He will chase Gordhan into another dimension if he has to, consequences be damned. (That downgrade? Brace yourself.) He will use every dilatory tactic known to the legal profession in order to stall the formation of the judicial committee of enquiry that was mandated in the State of Capture report. He will swing wildly and often, and a cardboard stage sword will vanquish his opposition with a billion paper-cuts giving up is not an option. giving up is not an option. The truly terrible thing is that, if Zuma goes, we ll be so bloodied and broken that we won t have the energy to brace for what comes next. Because if Thuli s reports were real literature, we d understand that Zuma and the Guptas were metaphors for a state and a system so captured by competing interests that fight against capture is itself a form of capture. It opens The truly terrible thing is that, if Zuma goes, we ll be so bloodied and broken that we won t have the energy to brace for what comes next. Because if Thuli s reports were real literature, we d understand that Zuma and the Guptas were metaphors for a state and a system so captured by competing interests that fight against capture is itself a form of capture. It opens MC Escher MC Escher MC Escher puzzle-like onto another trap, and then another, and then another, and the next set of thugs find themselves secure in our discomfort. puzzle-like onto another trap, and then another, and then another, and the next set of thugs find themselves secure in our discomfort. DM DM DM Photo: President Jacob Zuma is seen during a visit to the Kwanyamazane township with the ANC s 102nd birthday celebrations in Nelspruit, Mpumalanga, Wednesday, 8 January 2014. Picture: SAPA stringer Photo: President Jacob Zuma is seen during a visit to the Kwanyamazane township with the ANC s 102nd birthday celebrations in Nelspruit, Mpumalanga, Wednesday, 8 January 2014. Picture: SAPA stringer Richard Poplak was born and lives in Johannesburg, South Africa. He trained as a filmmaker and fine artist at Montreal s Concordia University and has produced and directed numerous short films, music videos and commercials. Now a full-time writer, Richard is a senior contributor at South Africa s leading news site, Daily Maverick, and a frequent contributor to publications all over the world. He is a member of Deca Stories, the international long-form non-fiction collective.