Some social grant recipients in Pietermaritzburg have still not been paid this month, and their requests for explanations from the South African Social Security Agency (SASSA) remain unanswered. Some social grant recipients in Pietermaritzburg have still not been paid this month, and their requests for explanations from the South African Social Security Agency (SASSA) remain unanswered. Some social grant recipients in Pietermaritzburg have still not been paid this month, and their requests for explanations from the South African Social Security Agency (SASSA) remain unanswered. These beneficiaries These beneficiaries These beneficiaries These beneficiaries These beneficiaries from SASSA offices on November 1 and were told to return the next day. On November 2 about 100 beneficiaries who went to the SASSA offices demanding an explanation were told the computer system was down. from SASSA offices on November 1 and were told to return the next day. On November 2 about 100 beneficiaries who went to the SASSA offices demanding an explanation were told the computer system was down. from SASSA offices on November 1 and were told to return the next day. On November 2 about 100 beneficiaries who went to the SASSA offices demanding an explanation were told the computer system was down. from SASSA offices on November 1 and were told to return the next day. On November 2 about 100 beneficiaries who went to the SASSA offices demanding an explanation were told the computer system was down. from SASSA offices on November 1 and were told to return the next day. On November 2 about 100 beneficiaries who went to the SASSA offices demanding an explanation were told the computer system was down. Some told GroundUp there had been problems in September and October too. Some told GroundUp there had been problems in September and October too. Some told GroundUp there had been problems in September and October too. After visiting the offices twice two weeks back, we were told to go and check on the payment day at the end of this month, said Mahlengi Dludla, who receives child grants of R720 a month but did not get paid this month. After visiting the offices twice two weeks back, we were told to go and check on the payment day at the end of this month, said Mahlengi Dludla, who receives child grants of R720 a month but did not get paid this month. After visiting the offices twice two weeks back, we were told to go and check on the payment day at the end of this month, said Mahlengi Dludla, who receives child grants of R720 a month but did not get paid this month. At first they told us we will be paid in January, then they changed their tune. They said we should check at the end of the month. I will go and check but I m scared of the outcome. It s different stories and different dates. It s so confusing. At first they told us we will be paid in January, then they changed their tune. They said we should check at the end of the month. I will go and check but I m scared of the outcome. It s different stories and different dates. It s so confusing. At first they told us we will be paid in January, then they changed their tune. They said we should check at the end of the month. I will go and check but I m scared of the outcome. It s different stories and different dates. It s so confusing. At first they told us we will be paid in January, then they changed their tune. They said we should check at the end of the month. I will go and check but I m scared of the outcome. It s different stories and different dates. It s so confusing. At first they told us we will be paid in January, then they changed their tune. They said we should check at the end of the month. I will go and check but I m scared of the outcome. It s different stories and different dates. It s so confusing. What are we are supposed to do? Our children are hungry. When they told us they have a problem with their computer, we questioned how that happens. They said there are many people who are getting paid and that is causing the systems breakdown. said Dludla. What are we are supposed to do? Our children are hungry. When they told us they have a problem with their computer, we questioned how that happens. They said there are many people who are getting paid and that is causing the systems breakdown. said Dludla. What are we are supposed to do? Our children are hungry. When they told us they have a problem with their computer, we questioned how that happens. They said there are many people who are getting paid and that is causing the systems breakdown. said Dludla. What are we are supposed to do? Our children are hungry. When they told us they have a problem with their computer, we questioned how that happens. They said there are many people who are getting paid and that is causing the systems breakdown. said Dludla. What are we are supposed to do? Our children are hungry. When they told us they have a problem with their computer, we questioned how that happens. They said there are many people who are getting paid and that is causing the systems breakdown. said Dludla. GroundUp s attempts to get information from SASSA were unsuccessful. GroundUp s attempts to get information from SASSA were unsuccessful. GroundUp s attempts to get information from SASSA were unsuccessful. In response to an e-mail, spokesperson Kgomoco Diseko referred GroundUp to KwaZulu-Natal spokesperson Vusi Mahaye, who had not responded to questions at the time of publication. In response to an e-mail, spokesperson Kgomoco Diseko referred GroundUp to KwaZulu-Natal spokesperson Vusi Mahaye, who had not responded to questions at the time of publication. In response to an e-mail, spokesperson Kgomoco Diseko referred GroundUp to KwaZulu-Natal spokesperson Vusi Mahaye, who had not responded to questions at the time of publication. Last week communications manager Mbizeni Mdlalose told GroundUp that beneficiaries should go to SASSA offices to get answers. DM Last week communications manager Mbizeni Mdlalose told GroundUp that beneficiaries should go to SASSA offices to get answers. DM Last week communications manager Mbizeni Mdlalose told GroundUp that beneficiaries should go to SASSA offices to get answers. Last week communications manager Mbizeni Mdlalose told GroundUp that beneficiaries should go to SASSA offices to get answers. Last week communications manager Mbizeni Mdlalose told GroundUp that beneficiaries should go to SASSA offices to get answers. DM DM DM Photo: Social grant beneficiaries in Pietermaritzburg have not received their grants this month. Photo: Nompendulo Ngubane Photo: Social grant beneficiaries in Pietermaritzburg have not received their grants this month. Photo: Nompendulo Ngubane Photo: Social grant beneficiaries in Pietermaritzburg have not received their grants this month. Photo: Nompendulo Ngubane