Wits University condemned the violence that broke out at the institution on Wednesday afternoon. By Tshidi Madia, News24.   “Simply, violence doesn’t work, everybody gets injured,” deputy vice-chancellor Tawana Kupe said. He said 10 students and 14 security guards were injured in the stone-throwing outside the Great Hall, on the East Campus, on Tuesday. “That could all have been prevented if everybody had not acted with those levels of aggression,” Kupe told journalists. A report into Tuesday’s stone-throwing was almost ready and the institution would discuss its options with its lawyers. He said the conduct of the private security guards, who threw stones back at students, was unprofessional. On Wednesday, police used rubber bullets and stun grenades against Wits students. Two were arrested and three injured, university spokesperson Shirona Patel said. Kupe said students tried to protest in the streets of Braamfontein on Wednesday, but police stopped them. “Stones and stun grenades were used. Violence repeats itself in ways that are not productive for the causes which people are talking about.” He pleaded with those involved in the violence on its campuses to find other ways of making themselves heard. Students at campuses across the country have been protesting against Higher Education Minister Blade Nzimande’s announcement on Monday that universities could determine their own fee increases for next year, up to a maximum of 8%. Poor students would not have to pay the increases. DM Photo: An injured student from Wits University is helped by a fellow student after being injured when police force fired a stun grenade during the 3rd day of #Feemustfall demonstration, against fee increases at universities across the country were announced, in Johannesburg, South Africa, 21 September 2016. EPA/KIM LUDBROOK    Name Surname Email Address First Thing (Mon - Sun 06:15, SAST)
            
            Afternoon Thing (Mon - Fri 15:00, SAST)
            
            Info Thing (Special Events/Notices/Offers)
            
            Zapiro (Tues-Thurs) Subscribe