Clinton declared ' healthy and fit', Trump wants Ford away from Mexico, and new golf format to hit Australia. There is probably no decision facing the ANC more important than choosing its next leader. If you consider the recent voters’ reaction to its current leader, that our politics are becoming very competitive and that opposition parties have momentum, it is becoming clear that the ruling party needs a person acceptable to the whole nation. The ANC can either choose a “bad” leader – someone seen as similar to the current person on its election posters – and lose the 2019 elections, or choose a “better” leader, someone seen as a reformist, as different, and win. More and more it seems factions in the party are going to have to reach a compromise. Could it mean that Dr Zweli Mkhize will be SA's next president? By STEPHEN GROOTES.Read more 63,000 Today in 1916 tanks are used for the first time during the Battle of the Somme.Hard drives are so sensitive to vibration that even screaming at them can lower their performance. Proof that shouting at your computer definitely does not help. BFN: min: 12° max: 28°, rainyCPT: min: 12° max: 20°, cloudyDBN: min: 17° max: 26°, cloudyEL: min: 16° max: 25°, cloudyJHB: min: 12° max: 27°, sunnyKIM: min: 12° max: 30°, sunnyNLP: min: 8° max: 30°, sunnyPMB: min: 11° max: 29°, cloudyPKN: min: 12° max: 27°, sunnyPE: min: 14° max: 23°, sunnyPTA: min: 12° max: 28°, cloudy John Stupart is the editor of the African Defence Review. He has completed his masters in War Studies at Kings College and has blathered endlessly on several mediums on all things pertaining to African defence policy, strategic, operational and tactical challenges. Most importantly, he brings you DailyMaverick's First Thing daily newsletter each morning. Name Surname Email Address First Thing (Mon - Sun 06:15, SAST)
            
            Afternoon Thing (Mon - Fri 15:00, SAST)
            
            Info Thing (Special Events/Notices/Offers)
            
            Zapiro (Tues-Thurs) Subscribe