Branko further described Zapiro as a beacon of wit, insight and commentary on South Africa s political landscape for more than 25 years, further adding: He is a living legend, and we re honoured to have him draw cartoons for Daily Maverick. Branko further described Zapiro as a beacon of wit, insight and commentary on South Africa s political landscape for more than 25 years, further adding: He is a living legend, and we re honoured to have him draw cartoons for Daily Maverick. A new, dedicated section is being built to house the cartoons on the popular current affairs and political commentary website. Four new cartoons will be published weekly, one of which will be exclusive to the Daily Maverick, as well as housing an archive for Daily Maverick readers to explore some of Zapiro s best work from the past. A new, dedicated section is being built to house the cartoons on the popular current affairs and political commentary website. Four new cartoons will be published weekly, one of which will be exclusive to the Daily Maverick, as well as housing an archive for Daily Maverick readers to explore some of Zapiro s best work from the past. Nando's have agreed to come on board as exclusive sponsors for the section, joining two of South Africa's most vocal and edgy players in the social commentary space. Nando's have agreed to come on board as exclusive sponsors for the section, joining two of South Africa's most vocal and edgy players in the social commentary space. Jonathan Shapiro, Zapiro , was similarly excited about the move, expressing his joy at working with the highly talented editorial team of Daily Maverick that has carved out their own niche in South African political analysis and opinion . Jonathan Shapiro, Zapiro , was similarly excited about the move, expressing his joy at working with the highly talented editorial team of Daily Maverick that has carved out their own niche in South African political analysis and opinion . excited joy We expect the first Zapiro cartoons to appear in Daily Maverick mid-January, said Branko. DM We expect the first Zapiro cartoons to appear in Daily Maverick mid-January, said Branko. DM DM