First published by GroundUp First published by GroundUp First published by GroundUp There were clashes between police and student protesters at the Vaal University of Technology (VUT) in Vanderbijlpark on Thursday. There were clashes between police and student protesters at the Vaal University of Technology (VUT) in Vanderbijlpark on Thursday. There were clashes between police and student protesters at the Vaal University of Technology (VUT) in Vanderbijlpark on Thursday. On Thursday night a makeshift storage room, once an office, in the residence administration building was torched. Dr Segopane Seroka, the acting deputy vice-chancellor, indicated that they were still assessing the extent of the damage. On Thursday night a makeshift storage room, once an office, in the residence administration building was torched. Dr Segopane Seroka, the acting deputy vice-chancellor, indicated that they were still assessing the extent of the damage. On Thursday night a makeshift storage room, once an office, in the residence administration building was torched. Dr Segopane Seroka, the acting deputy vice-chancellor, indicated that they were still assessing the extent of the damage. Photo: The storage and maintenance shed was burnt down last night. Photo: The storage and maintenance shed was burnt down last night. Photo: The storage and maintenance shed was burnt down last night. On Tuesday a group of students who were disciplined for a protest in May 2016 received their letters of suspension. Seroka indicated that these students have mobilised support and are leading this protest. He said that the seven expelled student leaders could still appeal. He said the university remains officially opened and will only shut down as a last resort. On Tuesday a group of students who were disciplined for a protest in May 2016 received their letters of suspension. Seroka indicated that these students have mobilised support and are leading this protest. He said that the seven expelled student leaders could still appeal. He said the university remains officially opened and will only shut down as a last resort. On Tuesday a group of students who were disciplined for a protest in May 2016 received their letters of suspension. Seroka indicated that these students have mobilised support and are leading this protest. He said that the seven expelled student leaders could still appeal. He said the university remains officially opened and will only shut down as a last resort. We are having a heavy police presence and have beefed up our private security, he said. We are having a heavy police presence and have beefed up our private security, he said. We are having a heavy police presence and have beefed up our private security, he said. Students continued their protest by blocking the roads surrounding the campus. They intended to march to the main campus from the residence next door. Students continued their protest by blocking the roads surrounding the campus. They intended to march to the main campus from the residence next door. Students continued their protest by blocking the roads surrounding the campus. They intended to march to the main campus from the residence next door. Police met them in the road and gave them 10 minutes to disperse. Students ignored the warning and began to make their way to the main campus entrance. Police launched stun grenades and rubber bullets as students fled back into the residence. Students and police were then engaged in running battles with the police intent on keeping protesting students inside the property of the residence. Students attempted to launch attacks by using mattresses as shields and a fire hydrant to douse the tear gas which was aimed at them by police. Police met them in the road and gave them 10 minutes to disperse. Students ignored the warning and began to make their way to the main campus entrance. Police launched stun grenades and rubber bullets as students fled back into the residence. Students and police were then engaged in running battles with the police intent on keeping protesting students inside the property of the residence. Students attempted to launch attacks by using mattresses as shields and a fire hydrant to douse the tear gas which was aimed at them by police. Police met them in the road and gave them 10 minutes to disperse. Students ignored the warning and began to make their way to the main campus entrance. Police launched stun grenades and rubber bullets as students fled back into the residence. Students and police were then engaged in running battles with the police intent on keeping protesting students inside the property of the residence. Students attempted to launch attacks by using mattresses as shields and a fire hydrant to douse the tear gas which was aimed at them by police. We are in support of the national call for free and quality education, said Mosoane Kgaugelo, the deputy chair of the EFF Student command. Management has paralysed our SRC by expelling our members. They are refusing to engage us on important matters and so the protest continues. We are in support of the national call for free and quality education, said Mosoane Kgaugelo, the deputy chair of the EFF Student command. Management has paralysed our SRC by expelling our members. They are refusing to engage us on important matters and so the protest continues. We are in support of the national call for free and quality education, said Mosoane Kgaugelo, the deputy chair of the EFF Student command. Management has paralysed our SRC by expelling our members. They are refusing to engage us on important matters and so the protest continues. Expelled SRC president Troy Mathebula said the students want to sit down with management. He said that the students have asked for a neutral person to mediate between them, because there is a deadlock at the moment, contributed to by the fact that the student leaders were expelled. Expelled SRC president Troy Mathebula said the students want to sit down with management. He said that the students have asked for a neutral person to mediate between them, because there is a deadlock at the moment, contributed to by the fact that the student leaders were expelled. Expelled SRC president Troy Mathebula said the students want to sit down with management. He said that the students have asked for a neutral person to mediate between them, because there is a deadlock at the moment, contributed to by the fact that the student leaders were expelled. Photo: Police inform a protest leader that they cannot enter the VUT campus. Photo: Police inform a protest leader that they cannot enter the VUT campus. Photo: Police inform a protest leader that they cannot enter the VUT campus. Photo: A police officer gets ready to fire a tear gas cannister. Photo: A police officer gets ready to fire a tear gas cannister. Photo: A police officer gets ready to fire a tear gas cannister. Photo: A protester uses a rock to block a road. Photo: A protester uses a rock to block a road. Photo: A protester uses a rock to block a road. Photo: A protester uses a catapult to launch stones at the police while a colleague shields him with a bin. Photo: A protester uses a catapult to launch stones at the police while a colleague shields him with a bin. Photo: A protester uses a catapult to launch stones at the police while a colleague shields him with a bin. Photo: Students threw rocks at the police and protected themselves with a mattress. Photo: Students threw rocks at the police and protected themselves with a mattress. Photo: Students threw rocks at the police and protected themselves with a mattress. Photo: Protesters flee as police open fire with rubber bullets. Photo: Protesters flee as police open fire with rubber bullets. Photo: Protesters flee as police open fire with rubber bullets. Photo: Students used a water hydrant to douse the tear gas. Photo: Students used a water hydrant to douse the tear gas. Photo: Students used a water hydrant to douse the tear gas. Photo: Protesters set mattresses and bins alight. Photo: Protesters set mattresses and bins alight. Photo: Protesters set mattresses and bins alight. Photo: Students fled through the streets and a canal near the university. Photo: Students fled through the streets and a canal near the university. Photo: Students fled through the streets and a canal near the university. The situation had calmed down at the time of publication. DM The situation had calmed down at the time of publication. DM The situation had calmed down at the time of publication. DM The situation had calmed down at the time of publication. The situation had calmed down at the time of publication. DM DM Main photo: Student protesters at Vaal University of Technology set mattresses and bins alight on Thursday. Main photo: Student protesters at Vaal University of Technology set mattresses and bins alight on Thursday. Main photo: Student protesters at Vaal University of Technology set mattresses and bins alight on Thursday.