st Anyway, I came to Wits to get a sense of what will happen in the next perilous week, and I wasn t particularly interested in talking to leaders from either side. They had made their arguments perfectly clear in competing memoranda memoranda press conferences Last Tuesday's prime-time bout those 21,000 or so cats who voted to keep the joint open in last week s SMS poll .) Whereas during FMF s nascency there were varying divisions between those arguing for a zero increment (a halt of fee rises), and those demanding free education for all, according to Masisi the movement unreservedly backs the latter. Indeed, in the middle of September in the middle of September Habib said to me when I spoke to him prior to the latest outbreak of violence the university council was aiming for a General Assembly as a last ditch effort at least a week before Mpofu s cameo.) When an accommodation on a General Assembly memorandum could not be reached because the university would not could not agree to an early morning demand by the movement insisting on a shutdown until fees were eliminated, the powwow was postponed indefinitely. on Monday they are planning to keep all campuses open . And so: World War VII looms. Sisulu wannabe , earned himself a BA last year in the current populist political climate, his career is all but made. The list goes on. Kefentse Mkhari, who has yet to graduate? Well, he s been pushed aside, she says, hasn t he? acting national police commissioner Lieutenant-General Khomotso Phahlane has spoken , her face sort of melts into a much older version of Khensani Masisi the version that knows much disappointment and pain. to come on campus and make statements ? How did they even get on campus you can t just walk in here? (It s a good question Colin Maine, ANCYL president, is nearing the retirement age for a lecturer.) Big game political maneuvering is occurring on the campuses of the country; in order to complete the perfect loop of apartheid-era they d consider joining up with a re-upped, rebranded version of the ANC post the 2019 elections . This dizzying little nugget of extreme political opportunism was dumped into one of the year s busier news weeks, when the EFF s natural constituency was occupied with the effort of dodging rubber bullets and ducking stun grenades. Richard Poplak was born and lives in Johannesburg, South Africa. He trained as a filmmaker and fine artist at Montreal s Concordia University and has produced and directed numerous short films, music videos and commercials. Now a full-time writer, Richard is a senior contributor at South Africa s leading news site, Daily Maverick, and a frequent contributor to publications all over the world. He is a member of Deca Stories, the international long-form non-fiction collective.